Everything we have discussed before is directly related to motivation.
What is motivation? Let's look at it again.
In order to make all the tasks set before the organization or before a person
during the annual interview or in the planned trial period
were achieved, it is not enough to have only a set of qualified personnel.
Really? Why?
Because it is necessary to organize the work in such a way
that everyone puts the maximum effort to perform the tasks set.
And this is already difficult.
And this is really management.
And how to organize the work of people so that they put the maximum effort,
not to sit at work from one call to another.
This is already management art.
By the way, in management courses,
they read a lot of different subjects.
Marketing, economics, finance.
All this is very important, all this is necessary.
Without it, it is impossible.
Maybe because I am a director of personnel,
so it seems to me that the most important aspect of management is human resources.
But maybe not only because of this.
Everything that happens is done by human hands and brains.
If we cannot manage people, we will not be able to manage the economy.
People make it.
We will not be able to manage marketing.
What is marketing?
If you buy some product, this product should be delivered by a person.
If you do not know how to manage these people, who will deliver the information?
Therefore, management of human resources,
motivation of these resources is the most important aspect of management.
Successful and unsuccessful managers are those who know how to manage the staff.
So, let's move on to the motivation function.
The eternal topic, the infinite.
We start this infinite topic, the insanely interesting topic.
What is it interesting about?
About the fact that any person wants to feel motivated when he goes to work.
He wants to do what he likes.
And to do so and to receive money for it,
so that he receives pleasure and satisfaction not only from work, but also from the reward.
And the company is interesting because it wants to have motivated employees,
who will work more and more effectively.
How to achieve this?
Almost like a fairy tale, almost an unfulfilled dream.
But in some companies it comes true, some companies strive for it.
One of the problems in today's market,
which organizations face in the field of stimulating employees,
is that two generally known principles are used.
Increase in salary or fired.
If you don't like it, you can quit.
We pay like this.
Someone works well, he was paid more.
That's it.
There are no other stimuli.
In principle, you can say, well, what is right?
A person works for money.
For the idea, of course, we are interested in a lot of different components when we get to work,
which we will talk about a little later.
But salary is an important factor.
Although, as many studies show,
salary is not the main criterion of evaluation when a person changes his job.
Look how interesting.
Often we choose a job because we leave one and go to another, where they pay more.
On the other hand, when we leave a job,
the argument that I am leaving where I am paid more is not always the main one.
Even today in large Western companies,
managers are best known for some motivation theories.
Because motivation is a serious, important argument in any company.
And, of course, to know about various theories, approaches, trends,
what were, what are now,
and, in principle, you can even read what will be fashionable and what will be accepted on the market after a while.
Any manager or person who considers his career growth as managerial,
that is, a soldier who does not want to be a general,
so any general should know the basics of managing and managing people.
And the most important component is motivation.
Naturally, high efficiency and adequate stimulation of employees is an important function of management.
And it absolutely cannot be ignored.
It cannot be made very simple and it cannot be complicated,
but it is necessary to have an idea of ​​art of motivation.
And now let's talk about this art.
Question. Why do you work?
Is the question asked correctly?
Or better to ask why do you work in this position?
From your point of view, which question is more correct?
If we can answer the first question right away, why do you work?
The answer is, I work for money.
Then the second question, I work for money in this position,
is unlikely to be answered by a person right away,
because he will think about it, why I really work in this position.
Think about it, why do you work in the position you are in now?
Why?
Well, money is clear, not free.
And why else?
Let's try to answer these questions.
What motivates you to work in this or that position?
Behavior at work can be controlled by external and internal factors.
The external factor is the stimulus-reaction,
the internal factor is the behavior of a person at work,
and it is controlled by the influence on the inner world of a person, on his needs.
That is, I work in this position because my needs are being fulfilled,
I achieve something, I get satisfaction.
That is, a certain motivation.
Speaking of motivation and the theory of motivation,
let's start with the last century.
Capitalism was developing, it was 200 years old,
100 years have passed, it was developing,
and people began to think about why some companies are more successful,
others are less successful.
What makes people work more effectively,
and how many wolves do not feed, but look into the forest.
How to influence people to work?
Naturally, people began to be interested in these issues.
The very first thing that comes to mind is psychology.
At the turn of the centuries,
such an interesting science as psychoanalysis appeared.
Psychoanalysis was created at the end of the last century
by the Austrian scientist Sigmund Freud.
I think almost everyone knows Freud.
The personality is odious, the theory is known,
although probably more known as the theory of sleep, the theory of sex.
And few people now even associate it with the theory of psychoanalysis
from the point of view of even some motivational things.
Psychoanalysis also arose not from nothing.
The basis for this is psychology,
where psycho is the soul, and logos, as we know, is science.
This is a science about the patterns of the development and functioning of the psyche.
Do not confuse it with psychiatry, which deals with the violation of the functioning of the psyche.
By the way, there are really confused people here.
And psychoanalysis is also not psychiatry.
Freud's successors are the famous Jung,
as well as Alfred Alder, and some others.
In fact, it is probably better to be a successor than to create a direction.
Because, as a rule, the successor always argues with the founder's father.
Therefore, all his successors argued with Freud.
And the successors, based on his psychoanalysis, created their own theories, their own approaches,
argued with Freud's postulates.
But it is Freud who is the father of psychoanalysis.
And, in fact, the theory of human behavior is the first and one of the most influential theories of personality in psychology.
The theory of personality.
And usually it refers to the classical psychoanalysis created by Sigmund Freud.
By the way, many people forget about this.
That it was really a theory of personality in psychology, and this is a classical psychoanalysis.
The structure of the human psyche is distinguished by two spheres, the conscious and the unconscious.
The unconscious is the biological nature of a person and is governed by instincts.
The instinct of self-preservation, for example, which regulates the sensory sphere of natural needs.
I want to eat, I will go and eat.
Here the fire is dangerous, I will not go there.
The instinct of self-preservation.
And the conscious, which controls the unconscious and determines behavior in the public sphere, in the public environment.
There is a conflict between the conscious and the unconscious.
Then the balance between the two spheres of the psyche collapses.
Here psychoanalysis helps to understand the problem of this conflict.
The psyche is automatically regulated by the principle of satisfaction, which is modified in the principle of reality.
And with various violations, a reset is carried out through the unconscious sphere.
When some negative information accumulates and I cannot perceive it, I just reset it and do not refuse it.
It is not there.
Later Freud worked on his views.
He conducted a lot of experiments.
I will not talk about it now.
But his ego and super ego are really very well known.
The self and the super self.
The self is a part of a person's personality, which is in contact with the outside world.
The self and the super self are very interesting qualities.
This is what a person should do in society.
This is morality, this is honor, this is shame.
This is super ego.
Freud distributed such interesting things at different levels.
That is, I am the world and my morality, shame, honor, conscience.
Probably, conscience will be the key word in the super ego.
The super ego is my conscience.
Through this prism, I look at the world around me.
In this case, why do we stop at Freud?
Because he is the father of psychoanalysis.
Many theories of motivation will use him as a basis.
Naturally, after rethinking, changing, improving, maybe even before recognition.
But he is the first brick on which a huge building called the theory of motivation is built.
At the same time, they lived at the same time.
Ivan Petrovich Pavlov, Edith von Freud.
One in Russia, the other in Europe.
Ivan Petrovich Pavlov developed...
In general, he is a famous physiologist.
By the way, he became the first Russian Nobel laureate in 1903.
He studied the science of higher neural activity.
I think the first thing that comes to mind when any of us hears the surname Pavlov,
is the experience with dogs, is the conditional and unconditional reflexes.
Again, conscious, unconscious, conditional, unconditional.
Everything is very interconnected.
As at the beginning of the last century, science developed in different countries in approximately the same direction.
Pavlov, the creation of the theory of conditional and unconditional reflexes,
was another brick on which the Americans built their theories.
And they called themselves...
Of course, not them, later they were defined as behaviorists.
From the English word behave.
That is, those who studied behavior, conditional and unconditional behavior reflexes.
So, behaviorism, behavior is one of the directions in psychology.
If Freud is psychoanalysis, Pavlov is physiology, then it is psychology.
Psycho-soul, logos-science of the soul.
That is, it is one of the directions of the science of the soul.
The program was proclaimed in 1913 by the American researcher John Watson,
who believed that it was necessary to study not consciousness, but behavior.
That's where they are called behaviorists.
They studied a person's reaction, his reaction to some things happening from the outside,
that is, to certain irritants, let's say, external.
Studying the direct connections of stimuli and reactions, reflexes,
behaviorism attracted the attention of psychologists to study the skills, skills and experience.
He opposed psychoanalysis.
Behaviorism initiated various psychological and psychotherapeutic schools.
By the way, today, not so fashionable as it was fashionable 10 years ago,
the so-called NLP, Neuro-linguistic programming.
It is very controversial how useful it is, how useless it is,
what this NLP actually affects when it affects a person.
But the basis for NLP and behavioral therapy was behaviorism.
That is, the brick Freud, Pavlov and behaviorism.
These are three bricks on which various tendencies, schools, theories arose and collapsed.
It is interesting to note that the Americans had an ambiguous relationship with Sigmund Freud.
For example, psychoanalysis was, let's say, almost devoted to anathemas,
and they thought it was a false science.
Although then they reduced the momentum a little and decided that, probably, it was not a false science,
that psychoanalysis could be used, but in psychiatry, and only those who have a doctor's diploma, a medical diploma.
People without such a diploma cannot do psychoanalysis in America.
Such things happened in the future, in the middle of the last century.
In our country, with socialism, behaviorism, in general, developed in the 1930s.
By the way, Bekhterev was one of those who considered these issues and studied them.
But, as many scientific trends in those years, they were unpopular, let's say, harmful.
It's almost like Weissman and Morgan in genetics, for which Vavilov suffered.
The same thing happened here.
Such subtle things were considered wrong, they did not agree with the concept of the construction of communism and socialism,
and how science developed only abroad.
Why are we going to consider Western theories and Western scientists now?
Because since the 1930s, it was forbidden to do this, literally, for fear of death.
And there is only one hope that now, as the country develops, as experience accumulates,
maybe some of you will contribute to the creation of some new theories, new trends.
Maybe some of you will be interested and will do this in your life.
And I am sure that in 10-15 years we will have our own scientists, our own academics, our own works, our own theories, our own schools.
I would really like to hope for this.
Well, while this is not the case, let's see everything that was created not by us, but before us.
Let's see what we can use and how we can use it, how useful it can be to us.
And we will just take something for a note and say, I know this, it's interesting, but in this case it is not applicable, because it has accelerated.
Or it does not match the views that I adhere to.
To management, to business, to motivation.
The Bifurcatian theories of motivation.
The Bifurcatists noted that the term motivation is too general and, in general, not scientific enough.
To be honest, I agree with them somewhere.
It is really very general and, well, today there are so many different theories that it is more theoretical than scientific, although it can be scientific, too.
Experimental psychology, under this name, actually studies the needs.
We will talk a lot about this.
Or the attraction of the drive.
There is a theory of drives, that is, the theory of attraction.
By the way, now this is a very fashionable word, drive.
Do you have a drive or do you not have a drive to work?
Slang, which came to us quite recently, was used more than 80-70 years ago as one of the theories of motivation.
Do you have a drive? That is, the movement, the attraction, to do something.
I am motivated by work, some process.
I have a desire to drive.
Drive is like to lead, to manage.
I like to manage the process.
And, of course, these attractions had a purely physiological nature.
Behaviorists explained behavior through the scheme of stimulus-reaction.
Again, let's remember Pavlov.
This is their brick, on which they built their building.
Pavlov's dog.
Stimulus-reaction, unconditional and conditional.
And considering the stimulus as an active source of reaction.
Based on this, motivation began to be understood as a state.
I am motivated, I have a state that makes me do something.
Because the function of this state drives my body to move.
That is, I am motivated to act, live, work, think actively.
There is an external stimulator, of course, but it exists.
For example, what is the most active stimulator for motivation, for drive?
Our boss came and said,
Sidorov, come to the desk and do what I told you in the morning.
Great drive, motivation, reaction.
The boss said, under this reaction, I am quickly motivated,
I sit at the table like a bunny, I do everything.
Here is the stimulus-reaction.
Please, it doesn't work, it works, great.
The system is in action.
So, behaviorists considered motivation as a drive.
As something that had a purely physiological nature.
Stimulus-reaction.
What other theories arose?
The theory of reinforcement of motives.
The theory was new, but as we say, everything new is well forgotten old.
If we remember that the theory of reinforcement of motives had a hedonic theory,
and hedonism is an ethnic doctrine,
originally developed in the ancient Greek Kyrenean school of the 4th century BC.
It's not even the last century.
The goal of life and the highest good was to enjoy.
When I was preparing for this lecture, I read it with pleasure and thought,
how it corresponds to the spirit of our time.
Many people now enjoy the good and believe that the goal of life is to achieve the good and enjoy.
This is what they work for.
Motivation? Motivation.
Yes, this is their motivation.
Enjoyment is not a reward for the good, but the good itself.
This was the opinion of the philosophers and Epicureans of ancient Greece.
And they are philosophers.
It's interesting that enjoyment is not a reward, but a benefactor.
It's a deep philosophical thought, but we won't dwell on it.
Although you can think about it on the board.
The good is defined as something that brings enjoyment.
If something brings me pleasure, it's good.
And if it's suffering, it's evil.
It's simple and logical.
The Greeks formulated two principles, which are also very logical.
The Greeks were wise in many things, including medicine.
People strive to maximize pleasure.
It works now.
And people strive to minimize suffering.
It also works.
Why should I multiply my suffering when I can multiply my pleasure?
And live for pleasure.
A great theory works for many.
It can be said that the goal of life is to reach a certain level.
It can be said that it's bad or good.
There are people who think it's good.
They accept it and they are effective.
Because it's motivation for them.
And for someone motivation is a completely different principle.
Taking the principle of hedonism as a basis, Thorndike proposed the law of effect.
Behavioral reactions, which follow the perceived experience, are fixed.
But if the reaction follows unpleasant experience, they disappear.
Is it logical? Yes.
Again, motivation is a reaction.
Motivation with a plus.
I will remember it.
It's good.
If I did this job well, and I did it like this, I will remember it.
And I was given a bonus for it.
I will remember it.
I will work like this.
But if I did it like this, and I was told to do it again, I will not work like this.
Motivation and reaction.
It works.
There are many people and many options for applying different methods.
It's perfect to have such employees who are all from the same incubator.
And all of them listen to the same team and are motivated by something simple and ordinary.
There are no such people.
That's why there are so many opinions and approaches.
So, human resources management is not only science.
It requires colossal endurance, calmness and good health.
So, not only Thorndike was engaged in the theory of motif reinforcement.
Ihall was engaged in this theory.
Let's pay attention again.
There is a father, a founder, a brick, and a big building grows on it.
Again, a brick and a building.
And then a plaza and a huge pyramid.
He, as a habit, understood the connection between the reaction and a specific stimulus,
which arose as a result of positive reinforcement or punishment.
He didn't offer anything radically different from Thorndike.
He just deepened and developed it.
He changed his mind a little.
In principle, the theory of motif reinforcement has several authors.
They looked at the same thing from different points of view.
This also has a right to life.
Skinner demonstrated that behavior can be effectively changed by reinforcing the desirable and ignoring the undesirable.
Let's manage people this way.
We will actively highlight and praise those who are effective.
And we will not react to those who do not work very well.
We will not scold them.
We will not offend or insult them.
We will not make them react in a way that will make them close themselves.
By the way, this is a really interesting approach.
It can also be used today.
We can actively reward, raise salaries, motivate with education,
give vouchers for rest to all families,
to the best employees,
so that others would be envious of this theory,
but so that others would want to succeed next year.
I agree with him that he left the punishment.
Punishment can force, change behavior.
Punishment never leads to efficiency.
If we take the history of our country,
which has been talked about a lot in recent decades,
there were many films about the system of camps, the system of punishment.
One of the theories is that we have become such a power
because we want to ask the question,
if there were no camps,
maybe we would have become an even bigger power,
even more interesting, strong,
and maybe we would not have had the shocks that happened.
Maybe punishment is not necessary.
An interesting point.
In this case, I like Skinner because he does not reject,
he just lowers the punishment.
Maybe in management, for some it is not his style,
and for some it is the style that a person was looking for,
or the one that he uses in everyday work.
There is a group of theorists,
let's say, theorists who are already closer to us in time,
who, using those bricks and foundations,
began to develop more, let's say,
deep and motivated theories.
The most famous, the first brick in this pyramid,
is Abraham Maslow.
He is followed by Alderfer, McLelland,
and he is written and pronounced differently,
Herzberg,
but more often Herzberg,
although if you see it written differently,
you mean that it is the same person.
Let's consider the theory of each of them.
All of them are based on the theory of Abraham Maslow,
so we will dwell on his theory in detail.
If you remember, a few slides ago I said
that even in Western companies,
although this theory has been around for more than 40 years,
the most common knowledge is Maslow's theory,
which is known by the management.
In principle, of course, the theory is really interesting,
controversial, but in any case,
it reflects in great detail
the various motivational principles
that exist in a person.
Let's consider the content theory of motivation in detail.
After we consider it,
I advise you to return to this slide
and look at everything highlighted in blue,
what makes one different from the other,
although they are all on the same foundation.
Maslow's theory.
The main brick.
The main one for building a pyramid.
Everyone later relied on this theory,
argued with it, agreed, disagreed,
refined, developed.
Abraham Maslow divided the needs
into primary and secondary.
In total, there were 5 steps.
There are more detailed maps,
if someone is interested,
he can already see the primary.
In general, I do not advise any literature
on this topic,
I do not advise reading any analytical.
If you are interested,
read only the primary sources.
You are smart, educated, interested people.
Make your own conclusions.
Analyze yourself.
First, it will be your personal experience,
and the experience that will be imposed on your practice.
It is individual, unique, exclusive.
And no one will tell you better than the primary source
about the theory of hierarchy of Maslow's needs,
like Maslow himself.
So, in this case, in this lesson,
these are the strokes, this is the quintessence.
If you want to dig deeper,
go to the primary source.
Read Freud, read Maslow,
read someone else,
those who interested you.
No, you will have enough knowledge
to understand where it comes from,
and what can be used for yourself.
That is, the main aspects,
the squeeze, the Rakhmetov method.
We read only what we need,
because all people are busy,
everyone is in business, there is no time.
If I want to do it for the soul,
I go to the primary source.
So, Maslow.
Five steps.
The first, the simplest.
Water, air, food.
We cannot do without it.
This is physiology, this is our physiological needs.
The second step.
Safety.
It is really very important
to have a stable job.
This is safety.
And to have a permanent source of income.
Medical care is also safety.
The third step.
The need for social contacts,
belonging to any organization.
The fourth step.
The need for recognition.
Look, each step adds.
It does not mean that if a person has a need for support
or recognition,
he does not need the physiological needs of water, air, food.
One of the other.
Therefore, this is a pyramid.
And the last and the highest is the need for self-expression,
in the disclosure of one's own abilities,
in creativity, in various relationships,
in growth, in everything.
Are all five steps inherent in everything?
Yes and no.
Depending on how much we need it today.
Imagine a person who is 20 years old,
35 and 65.
What needs will they have?
I think that probably the one who is 25
will have all five needs.
He will need the need for self-expression,
for self-expression,
and will definitely need to disclose it.
Who is 65 will have enough needs in safety.
He has already achieved everything in life,
he has already seen everything.
He has visited all roles,
in all capacities.
Now he is already old.
We all have a physiological need.
But for him to have a stable pension,
on which he can live,
medical care,
this is a need for safety for him.
So that no one would attack him on the street.
And he will live his life perfectly
in his country house or at home,
reading books, going to museums,
meeting friends.
He may not need social contacts.
For someone it is necessary,
they will go to the theater, to the museum.
For someone the need for recognition will be needed.
Such people continue to work.
These are creative people,
change managers, people who work
until 80-90 years old.
If we take people of science, actors,
and many other specialties.
It does not matter,
it can be a person of a working specialty,
who continues to work
when he is over 70.
He just has needs
that do not allow him to stop
and calmly go to rest.
These needs
actually depend on the state
in which we see
a person.
Either he becomes in a state of rest,
or he is looking for something in life,
because he goes further and further
on this ladder.
Let's start with the third stage.
Because the first, physiological,
and the second are very simple and understandable.
The third stage is social needs.
For work,
for us, a person in an organization.
What does it mean?
For managers.
How can I provide my employees
with this need?
How can I create
a single team at work?
How many trainings are there
now, even out-of-town,
on team building, on creating a team?
Here it is, the third need.
Periodically hold
general meetings
of the general and managerial staff.
Do not destroy informal groups
without need.
Why?
We have not yet talked about informal groups.
They exist
in every organization.
Absolutely in every one.
Some with a plus sign, others with a minus sign.
There are their formal and informal leaders.
Often informal leaders
can be stronger than formal leaders.
How to influence and how to fight?
In theory, this is a topic of a separate lecture.
And it would be ideal
to include conflictology,
psychology, psychotypes,
management of conflicts
and stress-resistance.
All together.
Because it is a very serious
and deep topic.
In principle,
the advice is this.
If there are informal groups,
it is not recommended to destroy them.
This is a fact.
But try to control them
or at least keep your hand on the pulse.
What is going on?
What kind of leader?
How does he influence?
Maybe he has a positive influence on everyone.
Or vice versa.
If you touch it, it will be harmful to the organization.
Try to control without destroying.
Create conditions for the
activity of employees outside the organization.
Corporate holidays are very popular now.
There is no such company
where corporate holidays
were not held at least in the New Year.
In any. Absolutely.
General outings,
summer holidays,
barbecue, sports events.
For example,
a coffee shop is very important.
If you have a huge office
and there is a coffee shop on the floors,
where people can come to pour coffee,
tea, water, talk,
communicate.
It is very important.
By the way, I did not write,
but a smoking room is also a place
where a person satisfies
social needs.
This is a place where you can find out,
hear the latest news, gossip.
Everything that
is often not heard
at meetings.
An amazing place.
Smoking is now prohibited in many companies.
So the center
was placed in a coffee shop.
If there were no coffee shops,
it would be nice to create them.
The fourth step is the need for respect.
Indeed,
when I respect a person,
I trust him.
I can give a person
more substantive work,
evaluate and encourage employees,
show respect to them,
provide some additional rights,
impose some additional
duties on a person.
I trust, I respect a person,
I trust him
more authority.
A lot of things
can be done in your team,
satisfying the need for respect.
And this need exists
in every person who works.
Any person
wants to be respected
in the team,
appreciated.
It is very important.
Any person is pleased
to hear
from time to time
that he or she likes how you work.
Well done.
It is very important.
There is no real leadership
in this.
People react to such comments
more emotionally,
there is a surge of
more efficiency
than a bonus.
A bonus is a bonus.
Yes, I earned it, it is pleasant.
But you work very well,
keep working,
I watch you, well done.
It is often expensive.
Very expensive,
but it is very important
to work with a leader
and with his or her colleagues.